README.md, before:

# EmSys: Coursework a Low Powered IoT node

In the coursework, you will design a low-powered wireless temperature sensor network node.     
You will configure your TinyPico device to read data from a DS18B20 temperature sensor, collect the data, average the data, and then send it to the central server, where the server will render it on a web page. 

__This project aims to make your device consume as little power as possible, so it can last off a battery for as long as possible when deployed in the field.__

### Submission guide

Submission for the coursework will be different to the labs. You will still be required to work in your lab groups, however, each member will submit an individual __pdf__ report via canvas.

In the lab you will be building your sensor nodes and then performing experiments to try and reduce the power consumption. To get power measurement readings you'll need to submit your code to me where I will perform the power reading experiment, send back the results to you, and give you some advice on what to further optimise. 

It is essential that you do this early. If you leave gathering power measurements to the last minute then it is likely that I will not be able to gather results for you. Feel free to batch multiple experiments to me when you send them and I'll send you a batch of results back. See Section [__Getting power measurements__] at the bottom of this page for how to send requests for power measurements. 

__How to phrase each experiment in your submission?__ 

I would expect you to perform quite a few experiments on your device to try to reduce the power consumption. However, if you try more abitious experiments, such as using the ULP, I will take this into consideration and won't need quite as many.

I would try to phrase each experiment as follows:
* Experiment idea and hypothesis.
* Description of implementation and code.
* Experiment results and evaluation.
* Reflection on the results.

## What the central lab server is expecting

Your TinyPico will communicate with the central lab server to periodically send it data that it has collected from a temperature sensor.

The server is expecting a payload of temperature data once every 30 seconds. Each payload will contain the following information:

* Your `gid` (the same identifier you used in Lab 2).
* 16 temperature measurements, with relative timestamps, taken over a 30-second window.
* An average ([arithmetic mean](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_mean)) of those 16 temperature measurements.

The server expects this payload to be in either one of two formats: a JSON format (like what we used in Lab 2 for the dotDevice commands); or a more efficient binary protocol. These protocols are outlined in section __Data transfer protocol formats__.

Your device must take 16 readings in a 30-second window, and __must__ transmit to the server a payload of temperature data _precisely every_ 30 seconds. The server will track these payloads' delivery, and an indicator will show if payloads are arriving too frequently or infrequently.

The actual measurements within the 30-second window can be spaced however you like. You could, for instance, capture them all as fast as possible at the start of the 30 seconds or space them out evenly over the entire 30 seconds. The choice is yours, but the timestamps associated with each reading must be accurate.

## The temperature sensor

![](imgs/ds18b20.png)

The DS18B20 datasheet can be found [[here](https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/DS18B20.pdf)].

This sensor is a one-wire sensor, meaning that we can use a single data pin to communicate with it. Don't worry; some libraries are provided to make this a bit easier, and if you do some googling, there are plenty of tutorials online detailing how to use this with ESP32s.

I would recomend wiring your TinyPico and DS18B20s as follows, you can use the dupont cables from your logic analyser to connect them up:

![](imgs/wiring.svg)

__Please take care to wire this up exactly as shown, as if the GND and VCC are the wrong way around the device will break (and get hot)__

* The data line (blue) is connected to GPIO pin 26.
* The power line (red) is connected to the 3.3v output.
* The GND line (black) is connected to the GND pin on the TinyPico.
* A 4.7KOhm pull-up resistor is connected between the data line and the power line.

This wiring setup should be fine for most experiments. However, if you would like to change the wiring for your device to perform an experiment you may, but message me first so that I know what changes to make in my power measurement rig.

### Arduino Libraries
Two libraries will be used for reading the temperature data from the DS18B20 device, `OneWire.h`, and `DallasTemperature.h`. More information on the `DallasTemperature.h` API can be found [[here](https://github.com/milesburton/Arduino-Temperature-Control-Library/blob/master/DallasTemperature.h)]. _There are also many good tutorials online for using the DS18B20 with DallasTemperature.h_. 

We will be using our homemade library, `dotDevice.h`, like in the previous lab, for transferring data to the webserver. This library has been upgraded with two new methods:

* One for sending JSON data to the webserver, `tracer.sendJSON(str)` (see below [__Data transfer protocol formats__]for more details)
* One for sending binary data to the webserver, `tracer.sendBIN((char*) data_buffer, size_t size)` (see below [__Data transfer protocol formats__] for more details)

__Installation of the libraries__: In the Arduino IDE please do the following:

* Go to ``Tools -> Manage Libraries...``, a popup should appear.
* In the top right type "Dallas Temperature"
* Click install for the Library by Miles Burton version 3.9.0.
* It should tell you that other libraries are required click ``install all``, this should install the OneWire library also.

### DallasTemperature library basic use

Create `OneWire` and `DallasTemperature` objects outside of your `setup()` and `loop()` functions.
_The oneWire object needs to be told our sensor is connected to pin 26_.

```C
OneWire oneWire(26);
DallasTemperature sensors(&oneWire);
```

We can now read a temperature value from our sensor in our `loop()` function. First we issue a command to our sensor to read in the temperature:

```C
void loop() {
        sensors.requestTemperatures();
}
```

This is a [blocking function](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/7407165/what-is-a-blocking-function) that will continuously poll the sensor until the temp value is ready to be read. There are ways to do this that are not blocking, which may be helpful for some experiments into power optimisation. You can either look at the datasheet or google to find out more information on this.

Finally, we can read the temperature value.

```C
float temp_in_c;

void loop() {
    sensors.requestTemperatures();
    temp_in_c = sensors.getTempCByIndex(0);    
}
```

This command takes an index to the sensor, in our case 0, as we only have one sensor on our system. (_If you are interested, the OneWire protocol is quite interesting, as it can have multiple sensors connected to a single pin_).

The command will return a 32-bit floating point number of the temperature in celsius.

## Data transfer protocol formats 

There are two different formats that you can use to transfer the temperature data from your device to the central server. 

* A JSON based protocol, similar to what you used to send commands for your dotDevice
* A binary protocol 

Each transfer method has a function in ``dotDevice.h`` to help with transferring data.

I would probably recommend starting with the JSON protocol first and moving onto the binary protocol later when you feel confident.

__Timestamp format__: For each of the 16 values recorded, we need a timestamp when they occurred in the 30 seconds since the last transmission. The units for the timestamps should be an integer in __milliseconds__. For example, if we have timestamp one, ``1150``, and timestamp two, ``1155``, then five milliseconds will have elapsed between timestamp one and two.

### JSON based protocol

The standard format to send over your temperature data is via a JSON format.
To construct the JSON use the ``String`` class similar to what you did for your dotDevices in lab 2.
However, instead of a small command, these JSON strings are a bit longer.

They contain your unique device name, the average temperature (you must calculate these on your device), and a list of 16 temperature readings. Each of the 16 temperature readings contains a relative timestamp and the associated temp value.

```json
{
   "device": "wibble00",
   "average": 19.4,
   "values":[ 
        {"timestamp" : 1034, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 1134, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 1234, "value": 19.2},
        {"timestamp" : 1334, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 1434, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 1534, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 1634, "value": 19.2},
        {"timestamp" : 1734, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 1834, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 1934, "value": 19.2},
        {"timestamp" : 2034, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 2134, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 2234, "value": 19.2},
        {"timestamp" : 2334, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 2434, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 2534, "value": 19.2}
  ] 
}
```

To transfer JSON data to the host server use the following `dotDevice.h` method.

```C
dotDevice server_con(ssid, password, ws, "wibble00");

void loop() {
   server_con.sendJSON(json_str); // where json_str is a String containing the command payload
}
```

### Binary protocol

The binary protocol uses fixed-point notation for the temperature values and aims to pack the temperature values as tightly as possible to minimise overheads when transferring the data. 

To send the binary protocol data, use the following ``dotDevice.h`` method:

```C
#pragma pack(1)
struct data_packet_struct
{
        // Binary payload layout
}data_packet;
#pragma pop(1)


dotDevice server_con(ssid, password, ws, "wibble00");

void loop() {
   server_con.sendBIN((char *)data_packet, sizeof(data_packet));
}
```

The format of the binary protocol is as follows: 

![](imgs/bin_protocol.svg)

* In total, the packed data payload is 76 bytes.  
* The first 8 bytes are used to pack the dotDevice ID that is unique to your group.
* The next two bytes (bytes 8-9) are for a command __these should always be set to 1__
* the next two bytes (bytes 10-11) are for the average (arithmetic mean) of all the values in the fixed point format specified below.
* The following bytes contain the 16 temperature readings, where the first 2 bytes are used for the timestamp, and the next 2 bytes are used for the temperature value (in the fixed point notation specified below).

To pack the data into these bytes, I recommend looking into how C structs can pack data [[here is an example tutorial](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/structure-member-alignment-padding-and-data-packing/)]. 

__Fixed point notation__: In the protocol set out above, the __average__ value and each of the 16 __values__ collected are in fixed-point notation.  Fixed point notation is where the binary number's decimal point is in a fixed position for every number. In our case, we have a 16 bit number for each of our values where the top 8 bits are the integer parts of our number, and the bottom 8 bits are the fractional part.

![](imgs/fixed_point.svg)

We are not very concerned with the precision of our temperature measurements, and so an excellent quick way to convert the floating-point value that is produced by `sensors.getTempCByIndex(0);` to fixed-point can be found [[here](https://embeddedartistry.com/blog/2018/07/12/simple-fixed-point-conversion-in-c/)]. Use the `float_to_fixed()` function.

## Remote pages

The main page will look like the following:

![](imgs/temp_probes.png)

Each group will have a dot associated with it that will change colour based on its current average temperature value. When you hover over a dot, you will see the group number that the dot is associated with and a breakdown of the latest temperature payload that the server has received (shown at the bottom).


For the breakdown, each dot represents one of the 16 timestamped measurements, and dotted lines show the average, max, and min temperature values.

To access this page please go to:
[http://ec2-52-15-138-171.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com:4000/](http://ec2-52-15-138-171.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com:4000/)


## Getting power measurements

To get power measurements, you need to submit your `.ino` file to me. Please send me an email with the subject `POW_G< your group number>` and attach your `.ino` file to the email. I will try to respond to this as quickly as possible and email you a breakdown of your devices power consumption.

The following is an example of what I will email you back:

![](imgs/power.png)

## Hints to getting started

* Start with just reading the temperature probe and printing the value using `Serial`.
* Move onto the JSON format and try to get values uploaded onto the server.
* Investigate ESP32 deep sleep modes, and google tutorials on this. Deep sleep modes are, by far the most critical way to save power.
* Take care when sleeping immediately after sending data, sometimes this can turn the WiFi radio off before the data has left the device. You might need to experiment with adding delays after sending the data and then experiment with how low you can get those delays.
* Look into how to save power specifically for the TinyPico device; again, some googling is required here.
* Investigate how to reduce the amount of off-chip communication with the temperature sensor. The default case it polls the sensor continuously via the onewire interface.
* Investigate how to use the binary protocol to transfer data.
* Investigate frequency scaling.
* Investigate how the ULP can be used.

* When using deep sleep: if you send data then immediately go to sleep, you may sleep the system before the data has fully had a chance to send. If you are finding your data is not always sending, add a small delay after sending but defore you go to sleep.

Commit message:

Added more details on the power measurements returned results.

README.md, after:

# EmSys: Coursework a Low Powered IoT node

In the coursework, you will design a low-powered wireless temperature sensor network node.     
You will configure your TinyPico device to read data from a DS18B20 temperature sensor, collect the data, average the data, and then send it to the central server, where the server will render it on a web page. 

__This project aims to make your device consume as little power as possible, so it can last off a battery for as long as possible when deployed in the field.__

### Submission guide

Submission for the coursework will be different to the labs. You will still be required to work in your lab groups, however, each member will submit an individual __pdf__ report via canvas.

In the lab you will be building your sensor nodes and then performing experiments to try and reduce the power consumption. To get power measurement readings you'll need to submit your code to me where I will perform the power reading experiment, send back the results to you, and give you some advice on what to further optimise. 

It is essential that you do this early. If you leave gathering power measurements to the last minute then it is likely that I will not be able to gather results for you. Feel free to batch multiple experiments to me when you send them and I'll send you a batch of results back. See Section [__Getting power measurements__] at the bottom of this page for how to send requests for power measurements. 

__How to phrase each experiment in your submission?__ 

I would expect you to perform quite a few experiments on your device to try to reduce the power consumption. However, if you try more abitious experiments, such as using the ULP, I will take this into consideration and won't need quite as many.

I would try to phrase each experiment as follows:
* Experiment idea and hypothesis.
* Description of implementation and code.
* Experiment results and evaluation.
* Reflection on the results.

## What the central lab server is expecting

Your TinyPico will communicate with the central lab server to periodically send it data that it has collected from a temperature sensor.

The server is expecting a payload of temperature data once every 30 seconds. Each payload will contain the following information:

* Your `gid` (the same identifier you used in Lab 2).
* 16 temperature measurements, with relative timestamps, taken over a 30-second window.
* An average ([arithmetic mean](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_mean)) of those 16 temperature measurements.

The server expects this payload to be in either one of two formats: a JSON format (like what we used in Lab 2 for the dotDevice commands); or a more efficient binary protocol. These protocols are outlined in section __Data transfer protocol formats__.

Your device must take 16 readings in a 30-second window, and __must__ transmit to the server a payload of temperature data _precisely every_ 30 seconds. The server will track these payloads' delivery, and an indicator will show if payloads are arriving too frequently or infrequently.

The actual measurements within the 30-second window can be spaced however you like. You could, for instance, capture them all as fast as possible at the start of the 30 seconds or space them out evenly over the entire 30 seconds. The choice is yours, but the timestamps associated with each reading must be accurate.

## The temperature sensor

![](imgs/ds18b20.png)

The DS18B20 datasheet can be found [[here](https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/DS18B20.pdf)].

This sensor is a one-wire sensor, meaning that we can use a single data pin to communicate with it. Don't worry; some libraries are provided to make this a bit easier, and if you do some googling, there are plenty of tutorials online detailing how to use this with ESP32s.

I would recomend wiring your TinyPico and DS18B20s as follows, you can use the dupont cables from your logic analyser to connect them up:

![](imgs/wiring.svg)

__Please take care to wire this up exactly as shown, as if the GND and VCC are the wrong way around the device will break (and get hot)__

* The data line (blue) is connected to GPIO pin 26.
* The power line (red) is connected to the 3.3v output.
* The GND line (black) is connected to the GND pin on the TinyPico.
* A 4.7KOhm pull-up resistor is connected between the data line and the power line.

This wiring setup should be fine for most experiments. However, if you would like to change the wiring for your device to perform an experiment you may, but message me first so that I know what changes to make in my power measurement rig.

### Arduino Libraries
Two libraries will be used for reading the temperature data from the DS18B20 device, `OneWire.h`, and `DallasTemperature.h`. More information on the `DallasTemperature.h` API can be found [[here](https://github.com/milesburton/Arduino-Temperature-Control-Library/blob/master/DallasTemperature.h)]. _There are also many good tutorials online for using the DS18B20 with DallasTemperature.h_. 

We will be using our homemade library, `dotDevice.h`, like in the previous lab, for transferring data to the webserver. This library has been upgraded with two new methods:

* One for sending JSON data to the webserver, `tracer.sendJSON(str)` (see below [__Data transfer protocol formats__]for more details)
* One for sending binary data to the webserver, `tracer.sendBIN((char*) data_buffer, size_t size)` (see below [__Data transfer protocol formats__] for more details)

__Installation of the libraries__: In the Arduino IDE please do the following:

* Go to ``Tools -> Manage Libraries...``, a popup should appear.
* In the top right type "Dallas Temperature"
* Click install for the Library by Miles Burton version 3.9.0.
* It should tell you that other libraries are required click ``install all``, this should install the OneWire library also.

### DallasTemperature library basic use

Create `OneWire` and `DallasTemperature` objects outside of your `setup()` and `loop()` functions.
_The oneWire object needs to be told our sensor is connected to pin 26_.

```C
OneWire oneWire(26);
DallasTemperature sensors(&oneWire);
```

We can now read a temperature value from our sensor in our `loop()` function. First we issue a command to our sensor to read in the temperature:

```C
void loop() {
        sensors.requestTemperatures();
}
```

This is a [blocking function](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/7407165/what-is-a-blocking-function) that will continuously poll the sensor until the temp value is ready to be read. There are ways to do this that are not blocking, which may be helpful for some experiments into power optimisation. You can either look at the datasheet or google to find out more information on this.

Finally, we can read the temperature value.

```C
float temp_in_c;

void loop() {
    sensors.requestTemperatures();
    temp_in_c = sensors.getTempCByIndex(0);    
}
```

This command takes an index to the sensor, in our case 0, as we only have one sensor on our system. (_If you are interested, the OneWire protocol is quite interesting, as it can have multiple sensors connected to a single pin_).

The command will return a 32-bit floating point number of the temperature in celsius.

## Data transfer protocol formats 

There are two different formats that you can use to transfer the temperature data from your device to the central server. 

* A JSON based protocol, similar to what you used to send commands for your dotDevice
* A binary protocol 

Each transfer method has a function in ``dotDevice.h`` to help with transferring data.

I would probably recommend starting with the JSON protocol first and moving onto the binary protocol later when you feel confident.

__Timestamp format__: For each of the 16 values recorded, we need a timestamp when they occurred in the 30 seconds since the last transmission. The units for the timestamps should be an integer in __milliseconds__. For example, if we have timestamp one, ``1150``, and timestamp two, ``1155``, then five milliseconds will have elapsed between timestamp one and two.

### JSON based protocol

The standard format to send over your temperature data is via a JSON format.
To construct the JSON use the ``String`` class similar to what you did for your dotDevices in lab 2.
However, instead of a small command, these JSON strings are a bit longer.

They contain your unique device name, the average temperature (you must calculate these on your device), and a list of 16 temperature readings. Each of the 16 temperature readings contains a relative timestamp and the associated temp value.

```json
{
   "device": "wibble00",
   "average": 19.4,
   "values":[ 
        {"timestamp" : 1034, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 1134, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 1234, "value": 19.2},
        {"timestamp" : 1334, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 1434, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 1534, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 1634, "value": 19.2},
        {"timestamp" : 1734, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 1834, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 1934, "value": 19.2},
        {"timestamp" : 2034, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 2134, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 2234, "value": 19.2},
        {"timestamp" : 2334, "value": 19.5},
        {"timestamp" : 2434, "value": 19.4},
        {"timestamp" : 2534, "value": 19.2}
  ] 
}
```

To transfer JSON data to the host server use the following `dotDevice.h` method.

```C
dotDevice server_con(ssid, password, ws, "wibble00");

void loop() {
   server_con.sendJSON(json_str); // where json_str is a String containing the command payload
}
```

### Binary protocol

The binary protocol uses fixed-point notation for the temperature values and aims to pack the temperature values as tightly as possible to minimise overheads when transferring the data. 

To send the binary protocol data, use the following ``dotDevice.h`` method:

```C
#pragma pack(1)
struct data_packet_struct
{
        // Binary payload layout
}data_packet;
#pragma pop(1)


dotDevice server_con(ssid, password, ws, "wibble00");

void loop() {
   server_con.sendBIN((char *)data_packet, sizeof(data_packet));
}
```

The format of the binary protocol is as follows: 

![](imgs/bin_protocol.svg)

* In total, the packed data payload is 76 bytes.  
* The first 8 bytes are used to pack the dotDevice ID that is unique to your group.
* The next two bytes (bytes 8-9) are for a command __these should always be set to 1__
* the next two bytes (bytes 10-11) are for the average (arithmetic mean) of all the values in the fixed point format specified below.
* The following bytes contain the 16 temperature readings, where the first 2 bytes are used for the timestamp, and the next 2 bytes are used for the temperature value (in the fixed point notation specified below).

To pack the data into these bytes, I recommend looking into how C structs can pack data [[here is an example tutorial](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/structure-member-alignment-padding-and-data-packing/)]. 

__Fixed point notation__: In the protocol set out above, the __average__ value and each of the 16 __values__ collected are in fixed-point notation.  Fixed point notation is where the binary number's decimal point is in a fixed position for every number. In our case, we have a 16 bit number for each of our values where the top 8 bits are the integer parts of our number, and the bottom 8 bits are the fractional part.

![](imgs/fixed_point.svg)

We are not very concerned with the precision of our temperature measurements, and so an excellent quick way to convert the floating-point value that is produced by `sensors.getTempCByIndex(0);` to fixed-point can be found [[here](https://embeddedartistry.com/blog/2018/07/12/simple-fixed-point-conversion-in-c/)]. Use the `float_to_fixed()` function.

## Remote pages

The main page will look like the following:

![](imgs/temp_probes.png)

Each group will have a dot associated with it that will change colour based on its current average temperature value. When you hover over a dot, you will see the group number that the dot is associated with and a breakdown of the latest temperature payload that the server has received (shown at the bottom).


For the breakdown, each dot represents one of the 16 timestamped measurements, and dotted lines show the average, max, and min temperature values.

To access this page please go to:
[http://ec2-52-15-138-171.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com:4000/](http://ec2-52-15-138-171.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com:4000/)


## Getting power measurements

To get power measurements, you need to submit your `.ino` file to me. Please send me an email with the subject `POW_G< your group number>` and attach your `.ino` file to the email. I will try to respond to this as quickly as possible and email you a breakdown of your devices power consumption.

The following is an example of what I will email you back:

![](imgs/pow_example.png)

This is a graph where the X-axis is the time, I perform an experiment of 100 seconds. The Y-axis is the current that the device is drawing in mA. 

In sleep states the current drawn will be very low and not displayed on this graph. For that reason, I also send you a detailed csv file with the power consumption breakdown that you can analyse in more detail in an application such as excel.

finally I'll send you the overall energy consumption for the experiment. I will also maintain a leader board on the website of the groups with the lowest power consumption. __If you are on the leaderboard this does not guarantee you a high grade, the write up and the process behind the experiments contributes more.__

## Hints to getting started

* Start with just reading the temperature probe and printing the value using `Serial`.
* Move onto the JSON format and try to get values uploaded onto the server.
* Investigate ESP32 deep sleep modes, and google tutorials on this. Deep sleep modes are, by far the most critical way to save power.
* Take care when sleeping immediately after sending data, sometimes this can turn the WiFi radio off before the data has left the device. You might need to experiment with adding delays after sending the data and then experiment with how low you can get those delays.
* Look into how to save power specifically for the TinyPico device; again, some googling is required here.
* Investigate how to reduce the amount of off-chip communication with the temperature sensor. The default case it polls the sensor continuously via the onewire interface.
* Investigate how to use the binary protocol to transfer data.
* Investigate frequency scaling.
* Investigate how the ULP can be used.

* When using deep sleep: if you send data then immediately go to sleep, you may sleep the system before the data has fully had a chance to send. If you are finding your data is not always sending, add a small delay after sending but defore you go to sleep.
